---
layout: post
title:  "Thinking About Diversity"
date:   2017-01-10 12:00:00 -0500
categories:
---
Last month, my office hosted a panel discussion event entitled, "More Than Just a Number: Looking past the metrics of diversity in tech to create truly inclusive workplaces." Despite that lengthy subtitle, the event was a success - good attendance, quality panelists, and thoughtful discussion. This isn't to say that I came away with all the answers, but it was really nice to be around people who have clearly thought about this topic deeply and with care.

Stepping back to give context - for the past 6 months, I have been working my first full-time position as an engineer at a health tech startup called Quartet, and it has been a great experience so far. I have been working in a full-stack position and have had the opportunity to dive further into Node and React/Redux, as well as learning new skills and technologies. Since previously I had worked only with a couple other devs in my time as an engineer, it has also been a great opportunity to be exposed to different programming styles, approaches, and opinions, and to see what a diversity of backgrounds can bring to the table on an engineering team.

Engaging with this diversity is something that my team has by no means perfected, however, and it is an ongoing effort for me and others on the team who value it.

A few points from the event that resonated with me, plus a few thoughts of my own:

1. <strong>Culture matters.</strong> Thinking about diversity in tech, it is easy to focus just on identifying and hiring candidates, but if you do not have a workplace environment, and a tech community, that is welcoming and inclusive, those candidates won't come looking or won't want to stay. They will be less engaged and less able to participate in the important peer exchanges that make diversity valuable in the first place.
2. <strong>It's not just about which candidate you hire, its about who gets to be a candidate.</strong> We need to attack the problem from multiple sides:
  * Support math and science education for women and minorities.
  * Reconsider the qualifications for a given job - currently underrepresented groups in tech will by and large not have the same background as cis, white males. Women also have a much higher threshold than men for how much of a job's requirements they meet before they will apply. Is that computer science degree really a requirement? In fact, is a college degree really necessary if the candidate has solid experience? Even if you are looking at a candidate's Github account rather than their education, consider that Github is a cis, white, male-dominated community.
  * Actively combat your own implicit biases, and engage with others to discuss theirs. Critique your own job postings. Terms like "rock star" and "ninja" skew male. Before and after an interview, have an open discussion about how your initial impressions may be biased. When thinking about cultural fit, look for how the candidate demonstrated their fit for your company's or team's values - not whether they seem like someone who will play ping pong and drink beer with you.
  * Promote women and minorities to positions of leadership - we need role models! The same way many young girls this year starting talking about wanting to become president one day thanks to HRC, seeing someone like you in a position is normalizing and inspiring. And on to that that it is also normalizing for people who are not like that person in their gender or ethnic identity.
3. <strong>Live it.</strong> Company values are a great starting point, but it all comes down to how the company lives out those values. Consider that there may be multiple ways of embodying a given value. At Quartet, one of our newly minted company values is "We Before Me." For some people this may mean joining in volunteer events the company organizes. For others whose lives look different and can't commit to events outside the work day, it may mean pitching in to keep the office kitchen clean.
4. <strong>Good and good for you.</strong> It sounds cliched, but it really is the right thing to do. Taking away any higher values or principles, at our root, we all have an interest in a thriving populace as we all benefit from the stability and improved quality of life that brings. At the same time, a diverse and inclusive workplace helps your company and your product. Having a greater diversity of backgrounds in the room gives you a broader perspective and improves your team's problem-solving abilities because of a diversity of approaches and opinions.

All that said, I don't like accepting any principle at face value, so I plan to do more reading into the results of increased diversity in the workplace. As I see it, there will always be both challenges and rewards to working on a diverse team, and we can better work through the difficulties and appreciate the rewards by keeping the lens of diversity present in our minds.
